---
layout: inner
title: DIG simulations
date: 2019-07-03
categories: astrophysics
tags: astrophysics
lead_text: Simulations of the Diffuse Ionised Gas in disc galaxies
---

A paper describing a set of self-consistent RHD simulations of the 
evolution of the Diffuse Ionised Gas (DIG) in disc galaxies was just 
accepted for publication in Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical 
Society. This work builds on previous models of the DIG that 
post-processed disc galaxy simulations from the [SILCC 
project](https://hera.ph1.uni-koeln.de/~silcc/), and provides the first 
fully self-consistent model of the DIG that combines the dynamic impact 
of photoionisation feedback on the structure of a disc galaxy with a 
detailed study of the ionisation and temperature structure of the 
resulting DIG.

Because of the complexity of this kind of modelling, significant 
approximations are made: the dynamic impact of Supernova explosions 
(SNe) is ignored and the coupling between the radiation and the 
hydrodynamics is done using a pseudo-isothermal equation of state that 
uses constant temperatures for ionised and neutral gas (the so called 
*two-temperature* approach). As a result of these approximations 
(especially the lack of SNe feedback), the dynamic structure of the 
model DIG is not as extended as the observed DIG. However, the 
self-consistent treatment of the radiation field shows that the amount 
of gas in the ionised layer correlates with the total strength of the 
ionising sources. This naturally leads to a DIG in which spectral 
hardening is effective, which in turn explains the observed emission 
characteristics of the DIG.

An example of one of the simulations is shown in the movie below. 
Initially, the dynamics is dominated by the D-type expansion of 
individual HII regions surrounding the UV sources, but as sources 
disappear and appear in different locations, the dynamics becomes more 
complex. After approximately 200 Myr, a dynamic equilibrium develops 
between the time dependent source model and the dynamic structure of the 
ISM.

<iframe width="560" height="315" 
src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/gjnFHlGt1yg" frameborder="0" 
allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; 
picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

For a fixed time dependent model for the source positions, there is only 
one simulation parameter that can be explored: the ionising luminosity 
per source. The movie below shows the evolution of the density structure 
for three different values of this parameter: a low value that yields a 
very dense disc that is predominantly neutral, an intermediate value 
that has a more extended ionised layer and less neutral gas, and a high 
value that has no clear neutral disc.

<iframe width="560" height="315" 
src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/JKvKDqrmKeg" frameborder="0" 
allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; 
picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

By combining the density and the ionisation structure of the cells in 
the simulations and integrating out along the y axis of the simulation 
box, mock emission maps can be made for HI (neutral gas) and Halpha 
(ionised gas). These are shown in the movie below.

<iframe width="560" height="315" 
src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/xmxWCkfczMo" frameborder="0" 
allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; 
picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>
